part1_object_detection/README.md, before:

# Part 1: Custom Object Detector from Scratch

## Overview
Complete object detection pipeline trained **from scratch** (no pre-trained weights) on a custom 5-class COCO subset.

## Dataset
- **Source**: COCO-style 5-class subset
- **Classes**: person, car, dog, bottle, chair (5 classes)
- **Format**: YOLO format labels (normalized coordinates)
- **Split**: 80 total images
  - Training: 64 images (80%)
  - Validation: 16 images (20%)

## Model Architecture
- **Type**: Custom CNN built from scratch (no pretrained weights)
- **Name**: SimpleDetector
- **Architecture**: 
  - Convolutional backbone: 3 conv layers (16→32→64 channels)
  - Fully connected head with dropout (0.3)
  - Direct bounding box regression + classification
- **Output**: 9 values per image
  - 4 for bounding box (x_center, y_center, width, height) - normalized
  - 5 for class probabilities
- **Parameters**: ~12.7 million
- **Model Size**: 50 MB

## Training Details
- **Device**: CPU
- **Epochs**: 100
- **Batch Size**: 4
- **Optimizer**: Adam (lr=1e-3)
- **Loss Function**: 
  - IoU Loss (bounding box regression)
  - Weighted CrossEntropy (classification - handles class imbalance)
  - Combined: `10.0 × IoU_Loss + WeightedCrossEntropy`
- **Data Augmentation**:
  - Random brightness (0.7-1.3×)
  - Random horizontal flip (50%)
  - Resize to 224×224

## Training Progress
```
Epoch 1/100  | Loss: 190.16
Epoch 25/100 | Loss: 158.75
Epoch 50/100 | Loss: 157.23
Epoch 75/100 | Loss: 149.96
Epoch 100/100| Loss: ~145.00 (estimated)
```
**Observation**: Steady loss decrease indicates good convergence.

## Evaluation Metrics

### Performance
- **mAP@0.5**: See TECHNICAL_REPORT.md for detailed metrics
- **Inference Speed**: 
  - FPS: See measure_fps.py output
  - Average Time: ~XX ms per image (CPU)
- **Model Size**: 50 MB

### Classification Accuracy
- Validation Set: XX/16 images correctly classified
- Handles class imbalance via weighted loss

## Key Features
1. ✅ **From Scratch Training**: No pre-trained weights
2. ✅ **Class Imbalance Handling**: Weighted loss (person:205, car:26, dog:8, bottle:17, chair:20)
3. ✅ **IoU Loss**: Better bounding box localization than MSE
4. ✅ **Data Augmentation**: Improves generalization
5. ✅ **Dropout Regularization**: Prevents overfitting on small dataset

## Files
- `src/model.py` - SimpleDetector CNN architecture
- `src/loss.py` - IoU loss + weighted CrossEntropy
- `src/train.py` - Training loop with augmentation
- `src/infer.py` - Inference demo
- `src/dataset.py` - Custom dataset loader
- `src/evaluate_map.py` - mAP evaluation script
- `src/measure_fps.py` - FPS/speed benchmarking
- `TECHNICAL_REPORT.md` - Comprehensive technical report

## How to Run

### Training
```bash
cd part1_object_detection/src
python train.py
```

### Inference
```bash
python infer.py
```

### Evaluation
```bash
# Measure mAP@0.5
python evaluate_map.py

# Measure inference speed (FPS)
python measure_fps.py
```

## Results Summary

### Strengths
- ✅ Real-time inference on CPU
- ✅ Small model size (50MB)
- ✅ Trains from scratch without pre-trained weights
- ✅ Handles class imbalance effectively

### Limitations
- ❌ Single object detection only
- ❌ Small dataset (80 images)
- ❌ Lower accuracy vs pre-trained models
- ❌ Bbox localization could be more precise

## Trade-offs: Accuracy vs Speed

| Aspect | Choice | Accuracy Impact | Speed Impact |
|--------|--------|----------------|--------------|
| Backbone | Shallow (3 layers) | ⬇️ Lower | ⬆️ Faster |
| Input Size | 224×224 | ⬇️ Lower | ⬆️ Faster |
| Detection | Single object | ⬇️ Lower | ⬆️ Faster |
| Training | From scratch | ⬇️ Lower | - |

**Philosophy**: Prioritize speed and simplicity for educational/edge deployment use cases.

## Technical Report

For detailed analysis including:
- Architecture design rationale
- Training methodology evolution
- Loss function comparisons
- Augmentation strategies
- Results analysis
- Future improvements

See **[TECHNICAL_REPORT.md](TECHNICAL_REPORT.md)**

## References
- YOLO (You Only Look Once) - Redmon et al.
- Faster R-CNN - Ren et al.
- IoU Loss - UnitBox
- COCO Dataset - Lin et al.

Commit message:

increased dataset , improved the  architecture

part1_object_detection/README.md, after:

# Part 1: Custom Object Detector from Scratch

## Overview
Complete object detection pipeline trained **from scratch** (no pre-trained weights) on a custom 5-class COCO subset.

## Dataset
- **Source**: COCO-style 5-class subset
- **Classes**: person, car, dog, bottle, chair (5 classes)
- **Format**: YOLO format labels (normalized coordinates)
- **Split**: 80 total images
  - Training: 64 images (80%)
  - Validation: 16 images (20%)

## Model Architecture
- **Type**: Custom CNN built from scratch (no pretrained weights)
- **Name**: SimpleDetector
- **Architecture**: 
  - Convolutional backbone: 3 conv layers (16→32→64 channels)
  - Fully connected head with dropout (0.3)
  - Direct bounding box regression + classification
- **Output**: 9 values per image
  - 4 for bounding box (x_center, y_center, width, height) - normalized
  - 5 for class probabilities
- **Parameters**: ~12.7 million
- **Model Size**: 50 MB

## Training Details
- **Device**: CPU
- **Epochs**: 100
- **Batch Size**: 4
- **Optimizer**: Adam (lr=1e-3)
- **Loss Function**: 
  - IoU Loss (bounding box regression)
  - Weighted CrossEntropy (classification - handles class imbalance)
  - Combined: `10.0 × IoU_Loss + WeightedCrossEntropy`
- **Data Augmentation**:
  - Random brightness (0.7-1.3×)
  - Random horizontal flip (50%)
  - Resize to 224×224

## Training Progress
```
Epoch 1/100  | Loss: 190.16
Epoch 25/100 | Loss: 158.75
Epoch 50/100 | Loss: 157.23
Epoch 75/100 | Loss: 149.96
Epoch 100/100| Loss: ~145.00 (estimated)
```
**Observation**: Steady loss decrease indicates good convergence.

## Evaluation Metrics

### Performance
- **mAP@0.5**: See TECHNICAL_REPORT.md for detailed metrics
- **Inference Speed**: 
  - FPS: See measure_fps.py output
  - Average Time: ~XX ms per image (CPU)
- **Model Size**: 50 MB

### Classification Accuracy
- Validation Set: XX/16 images correctly classified
- Handles class imbalance via weighted loss

## Key Features
1. ✅ **From Scratch Training**: No pre-trained weights
2. ✅ **Class Imbalance Handling**: Weighted loss (person:205, car:26, dog:8, bottle:17, chair:20)
3. ✅ **IoU Loss**: Better bounding box localization than MSE
4. ✅ **Data Augmentation**: Improves generalization
5. ✅ **Dropout Regularization**: Prevents overfitting on small dataset

## Files
- `src/model.py` - SimpleDetector CNN architecture
- `src/loss.py` - IoU loss + weighted CrossEntropy
- `src/train.py` - Training loop with augmentation
- `src/infer.py` - Inference demo
- `src/dataset.py` - Custom dataset loader
- `src/evaluate_map.py` - mAP evaluation script
- `src/measure_fps.py` - FPS/speed benchmarking
- `TECHNICAL_REPORT.md` - Comprehensive technical report

## How to Run

### Training
```bash
cd part1_object_detection/src
python train.py
```
*Note: This now uses the ImprovedDetector and ImprovedDetectionLoss.*

### Inference & Visualization
```bash
# Run inference on validation set and generate GIF
python visualize_results.py
```

### Evaluation
```bash
# Measure mAP@0.5
python evaluate_map.py

# Measure inference speed (FPS)
python measure_fps.py
```

## Results Summary

### Strengths
- ✅ Real-time inference on CPU
- ✅ Small model size (50MB)
- ✅ Trains from scratch without pre-trained weights
- ✅ Handles class imbalance effectively

### Limitations
- ❌ Single object detection only
- ❌ Small dataset (80 images)
- ❌ Lower accuracy vs pre-trained models
- ❌ Bbox localization could be more precise

## Trade-offs: Accuracy vs Speed

| Aspect | Choice | Accuracy Impact | Speed Impact |
|--------|--------|----------------|--------------|
| Backbone | Shallow (3 layers) | ⬇️ Lower | ⬆️ Faster |
| Input Size | 224×224 | ⬇️ Lower | ⬆️ Faster |
| Detection | Single object | ⬇️ Lower | ⬆️ Faster |
| Training | From scratch | ⬇️ Lower | - |

**Philosophy**: Prioritize speed and simplicity for educational/edge deployment use cases.

## Technical Report

For detailed analysis including:
- Architecture design rationale
- Training methodology evolution
- Loss function comparisons
- Augmentation strategies
- Results analysis
- Future improvements

See **[TECHNICAL_REPORT.md](TECHNICAL_REPORT.md)**

## References
- YOLO (You Only Look Once) - Redmon et al.
- Faster R-CNN - Ren et al.
- IoU Loss - UnitBox
- COCO Dataset - Lin et al.
